thinking/Glossary.md, before:

---
title: Glossary of Terms
description: List of terms used to discuss risks on Risk-First.
url: https://riskfirst.org/thinking/Glossary

featured: 
  class: bg3
  element: '<document>Glossary</document>'
categories:
 - Thinking Risk-First
order: 9
redirect_from: 
 - /Glossary
---

# Glossary

### Abstraction

The process of removing physical, spatial, or temporal details or attributes in the study of objects or systems in order to more closely attend to other details of interest.

### Agent

Agency is the capacity of an actor to act in a given environment.  We use the term _agent_ to refer to any process, person, system or organisation with agency.

## Balance Of Risk

The distribution of possible returns, given the set of risks you face from your position on the [Risk Landscape](#risk-landscape).  

### Feedback Loop

The process of testing an [Internal Model](#internal-model), through [taking action](#taking-action) to [Meet Reality](#meet-reality).  Typically, we talk about short or long feedback loops, depending on the intervals between [Meeting Reality](#meet-reality).

### Goal In Mind

A picture of the future that an individual or team carries within their [Internal Model](#internal-model);  An imagined destination on the [Risk Landscape](#risk-landscape).  A specific [Upside Risk](#upside-risk) we'd like to nurture and realize.

### Internal Model

The model of reality held by an individual, team, software system or other [Agent](#agent).   You can regard the concept of [Internal Model](#internal-model) as being what you _know_ and what you _think_ about a certain situation.  An internal model _represents_ reality:  reality is made of matter, whereas the internal model is information.

Obviously, because we've all had different experiences, and our brains are wired up differently: everyone will have a different [Internal Model](#internal-model) of reality.  

- Within an organisation, we might consider the [Internal Model](#internal-model) of a _team of people_ to be the shared knowledge, values and working practices of that team.
- Within a software system, we might consider the [Internal Model](#internal-model) of a single server, and what knowledge it has of the world.
- A codebase is a team's [Internal Model](#internal-model) written down and encoded as software.

### Meet Reality

Any moment where we test an [Internal Model](#internal-model) by exposing it's predictive power against reality.  Note that "Reality" might be limited in some way, for example, a trial period or test users.  

### Payoff

Payoff refers to the _value_ of the [actions we take](#taking-action).  When we decide on a course of action, we have in mind a risk we wish to manage.  If the action is likely to have a big positive effect on the risk of a project, we say it has a promising payoff, whereas if the action fails to manage the risk, then it hasn't _paid off_.  

### Risk

A possibility of loss or cost.  Anything that _can_ go wrong on a project, or is _going_ wrong, but resists exact realization.  We talk about risk because we wish to recognise both the range of possibilities and the range of cost.  

Usually broken down into: 

#### Attendant Risk

A Risk you expect to face as the result of [Taking Action](#taking-action).

#### Hidden Risk

Risks you aren't aware of when you consider [Taking Action](#taking-action).  i.e. an _unknown unknown_.

#### Mitigated Risk

Risks that, as a result of [Taking Action](#taking-action) have been minimized. 

#### Upside Risk

The possibility of things going well, and leaving us with a benefit.  We may [take action](#taking-action) to maximize the likelihood and return of upside risks.

### Risk Landscape

A hypothetical landscape on which risks can be placed.  [Taking Action](#taking-action) means making a move on the [Risk Landscape](#risk-landscape) to reposition a project so that it has a different profile of [Attendant Risks](#attendant-risk).

### Taking Action

Refers to any activity in the project.  Actions are taken in order to manage some risk.  At the same time, [Taking Action](#taking-action) usually means interacting with reality and updating the [Internal Model](#internal-model).

Commit message:

First draft of Risk-First-Analysis

thinking/Glossary.md, after:

---
title: Glossary of Terms
description: List of terms used to discuss risks on Risk-First.
url: https://riskfirst.org/thinking/Glossary

featured: 
  class: bg3
  element: '<document>Glossary</document>'
categories:
 - Thinking Risk-First
order: 9
redirect_from: 
 - /Glossary
---

# Glossary

### Abstraction

The process of removing physical, spatial, or temporal details or attributes in the study of objects or systems in order to more closely attend to other details of interest.

### Agent

Agency is the capacity of an actor to act in a given environment.  We use the term _agent_ to refer to any process, person, system or organisation with agency.

## Balance Of Risk

The distribution of possible returns, given the set of risks you face from your position on the [Risk Landscape](#risk-landscape).  

### Feedback Loop

The process of testing an [Internal Model](#internal-model), through [taking action](#taking-action) to [Meet Reality](#meet-reality).  Typically, we talk about short or long feedback loops, depending on the intervals between [Meeting Reality](#meet-reality).

### Goal In Mind

A picture of the future that an individual or team carries within their [Internal Model](#internal-model);  An imagined destination on the [Risk Landscape](#risk-landscape).  A specific [Upside Risk](#upside-risk) we'd like to nurture and realize.

### Internal Model

The model of reality held by an individual, team, software system or other [Agent](#agent).   You can regard the concept of [Internal Model](#internal-model) as being what you _know_ and what you _think_ about a certain situation.  An internal model _represents_ reality:  reality is made of matter, whereas the internal model is information.

Obviously, because we've all had different experiences, and our brains are wired up differently: everyone will have a different [Internal Model](#internal-model) of reality.  

- Within an organisation, we might consider the [Internal Model](#internal-model) of a _team of people_ to be the shared knowledge, values and working practices of that team.
- Within a software system, we might consider the [Internal Model](#internal-model) of a single server, and what knowledge it has of the world.
- A codebase is a team's [Internal Model](#internal-model) written down and encoded as software.

### Meet Reality

Any moment where we test an [Internal Model](#internal-model) by exposing it's predictive power against reality.  Note that "Reality" might be limited in some way, for example, a trial period or test users.  

### Payoff

Payoff refers to the _value_ of the [actions we take](#taking-action).  When we decide on a course of action, we have in mind a risk we wish to manage.  If the action is likely to have a big positive effect on the risk of a project, we say it has a promising payoff, whereas if the action fails to manage the risk, then it hasn't _paid off_.  

### Risk

A possibility of loss or cost.  Anything that _can_ go wrong on a project, or is _going_ wrong, but resists exact realization.  We talk about risk because we wish to recognise both the range of possibilities and the range of cost.  

Usually broken down into: 

#### Attendant Risk

A Risk you expect to face as the result of [Taking Action](#taking-action).

#### Hidden Risk

Risks you aren't aware of when you consider [Taking Action](#taking-action).  i.e. an _unknown unknown_.

#### Mitigated Risk

Risks that, as a result of [Taking Action](#taking-action) have been minimized. 

#### Upside Risk

The possibility of things going well, and leaving us with a benefit.  We may [take action](#taking-action) to maximize the likelihood and return of upside risks.

### Risk Landscape

A hypothetical landscape on which risks can be placed.  [Taking Action](#taking-action) means making a move on the [Risk Landscape](#risk-landscape) to reposition a project so that it has a different profile of [Attendant Risks](#attendant-risk).

### Stake

An [Attendant Risk](#attendant-risk) of taking some [action](#taking-action), which is fairly well known up front.  Placing a bet on a horse-race is a stake because you know how much you are likely to lose.   

### Taking Action

Refers to any activity in the project.  Actions are taken in order to manage some risk.  At the same time, [Taking Action](#taking-action) usually means interacting with reality and updating the [Internal Model](#internal-model).
